# Title Page

*Title*: Bioboxes - standardised containers for interchangeable bioinformatics
software

*Authors*: Peter Belmann (1), Johannes Dröge (2), Andreas Bremges (1,2), Alice
C. McHardy (2), Alexander Sczyrba (1), Michael Barton \* (3) 

  1) Faculty of Technology and Center for Biotechnology, Bielefeld University,
  33615 Bielefeld, Germany

  2) Computational Biology of Infection Research, Helmholtz Centre for
  Infection Research, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany

  3) DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA 

  \* Corresponding author: mail@michaelbarton.me.uk

*Running Title*: bioboxes software containers

# Abstract

Software is now both central and essential to modern biology. Yet lack of
availability, difficult installations, and complex user interfaces make
software hard to obtain and use. Containerisation, as exemplified by Docker,
has the potential to solve the problems associated with sharing software. We
propose bioboxes: containers with standardised interfaces to make
bioinformatics software interchangeable.

# Keywords

bioinformatics, software, Docker, standards, usability

# Main Text

The increasing size of data in biology has demanded a corresponding increase in
the reliance on software to automate tasks that have become impossible to do
manually [Ouzounis2012]. Improvements in technology have allowed greater
ability to create large biological data sets, where now small facilities can
feasibly do large-scale genomic sequencing or proteomics. Biology in 2015 may
require a researcher to be using a pipette one day, and running genome assembly
software the next. As the field changes to where scientists are expected to
regularly use bioinformatics tools, the difficulty to share academic software
is becoming a hindrance to both research and publication.

Bioinformatics software is seen as research output and published as journal
articles. This then follows that a bioinformatics software developer is
measured by the same metric as a biologist studying novel protein mechanisms -
the more articles the better. This has lead to proliferation of bioinformatics
software - the Wikipedia page for sequence aligners alone lists 64 different
implementations.

Perverse incentives have lead to a fire-and-forget approach to software;
publishing multiple software articles is rewarded while no direct metrics exist
for maintaining existing software [chang2015]. The *status quo* serves authors
by allowing them to generate long publication lists, and serves publishers by
generating revenue through article processing fees. The intended audience, the
biologists trying to do research, are then left to wade through a corpus of
buggy, inconsistent and confusing tools [stein2002]. This commentary addresses
three prominent symptoms of this system: lack of software availability,
difficulty installing software, and divergent formats and interfaces for common
tasks.

## Lack of software availability

A ridiculous situation in the publication system is that publishing an article
about software does not guarantee that the tool is actually available for use.
Unless the journal specifically mandates the use of a third party service to
host the software, the article may describe the tool as being "available on
request" - the reader has to contact the author for access. If the author
cannot (or does not want to) be contacted then this software essentially ceases
to exist.

Another common situation is that software is unavailable because the developer
has moved on to a different position, or if the research funding supporting
their position ends. This results in the developer no longer being able to
maintain the software, the website describing the tool no longer existing, or
both. A study related to this effect showed that, in many cases, bioinformatics
web addresses are often not available 2-3 years after the article describing it
was published. [klien2014]

## Difficulty installing software

Differences between operating systems and hardware require effort in
delivering software in a ready-to-use form. One example is when software is
written in a language such as C/C++ which must be 'compiled' to generate
platform-specific binaries. Compiling however is not a simple task, and even
harder in biology due to the limited experience biologists may be expected to
have with C++ build tools. Alternatively, even if tools are written using
'platform-independent' languages such as Java or Python, these often have
third-party dependencies which also must be downloaded and installed, requiring
additional time and effort.

As software delivery and maintenance plays no part in the publication process,
the biologist is usually left with the work of compiling source code, manually
installing required software libraries and debugging platform-incompatible
code: for instance to to decipher obscure output such as GNU make reporting a
g++ error because the wrong version of libboost-dev is installed.

## Lack of standards

Every piece of bioinformatics software has a different interface even when
performing the same kind of operation. For example no two short read aligners
may be expected to use the same method to identify the input file for
processing, e.g. this might be `--input`, `--fastq` or the position in the
input arguments. The output BAM file generated by the tool may be created in
different locations, or the output may not be stored in BAM at all. Across all
available short read aligners this leads to a multitude of different ways of
doing the same task each time: take a list of sequence reads and return a
description of how they map to a reference genome.

This leads to the current situation - where researchers spend much of their
time shifting data between the incompatible interfaces of different tools and
converting to required data formats. Is there a good reason why short read
aligners, which all do the same task, should not be standardised with the same
interface? How about genome assemblers, FASTQ preprocessors or multiple
sequence aligners? The tools for each of these tasks essentially perform the
same operation, but each has a different interface. Again, the current
situation does not serve intended users the software is written for:
biologists and bioinformaticians.

## Software containerisation and standardisation

The Docker platform [www.docker.com] allows the creation of lightweight
containers in which developers can install their software along with all
required libraries and scripts. These containers can then be easily shared
through a central repository, or as compressed files, and used in the same
way as if the software itself were installed. The bioinformatics field has
quickly recognised the opportunity provided by Docker where containers don't
dictate a specific software framework or language for implementing
bioinformatics tools, and allows integration with existing software.

Containerisation further has the potential to solve the problems of software
availability and installation outlined before, where bundling all dependencies
removes the need for the user to compile and install anything (except Docker
itself). Software containers also provide researchers with the option to
reproduce existing published results to replicate or expand on the work of
others. An example of this are the [nucleotid.es] and Critical Assessment of
Metagenomic Interpretation (CAMI) [www.cami-challenge.org] projects,
where the tools benchmarked are containerised and available for download by users.

Even with these outlined advantages, without standardisation bioinformatics
will continue to suffer from mismatching interfaces between tools in software
pipelines. The time consuming job of maintaining these pipelines then falls to
bioinformatician reducing their role from computational researchers to the
custodians of gluing different tools together.

To this end we, developers involved in both CAMI and nucleotid.es, have created
the bioboxes project [bioboxes.org] with the aim of specifying standardised
bioinformatics containers. A biobox is a software container with a standardised
interface which describes what kind of input files and parameters are accepted,
and which output files are to be returned. An example is a short-read assembler
which takes an input paired-FASTQ file and returns a contigs FASTA file. Each
developer creating a biobox should make sure the container accepts these inputs
and returns the expected outputs.

Specifying the same interface for the same task allows one tool to be swapped
for another in a pipeline. This creates an interchangeable parts list for
researchers which, combined with Docker containerisation, means biologists and
bioinformaticians have access to, and can immediately use a large body of
bioinformatics software. Figure 1 contrasts the existing state of
bioinformatics software with bioboxes standardised software containers. Figure
2 shows a command line interface to bioboxes which allows the reader to test
using a biobox.

We ask that developers try following the documentation on the bioboxes.org
website and contribute biobox-compatible Docker images of their software. Then,
biologists and bioinformaticians, editors and reviewers, should begin
requesting that biobox versions of software are available alongside
publications. At the same time the bioboxes project welcomes feedback from the
community. The website contains links on how to get involved through filing
bug reports or asking questions in the chat room. Ultimately standardisation
and the ensuing benefits will only be successful if they are both accepted and
driven by the bioinformatics community itself.

# Conclusion

The current state of bioinformatics software works against the users by
consuming time and effort, and against reproducibility by lacking methods to
recreate the work of others. The use of software containers with standardised
interfaces has the potential make the work of biologists easier by creating
simple to use, fungible tools. At the same time developers can make their
programs more easily available and usable by a wider audience.

# Competing interests

Docker Inc paid for MB's flight and accommodation allowing him to present
research at DockerCon Europe.

# Authors' contributions

PB, JD, AB, ACM, AS and MB jointly conceived the idea of bioboxes. PB, JD and
MB created bioboxes, implementing all code and creating documentation. AB and
AS supervised PB's master thesis on bioboxes, directing the project and
actively engaging in discussions. MB wrote the manuscript. PB, JD, AB and AS
revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

# Authors' information

PB, JD and AB are developers in the CAMI initiative to benchmark bioinformatics tools
for metagenomics. ACM and AS are CAMI organisers. MB created [nucleotid.es], a
project to benchmark genome assembly software. Both of these projects use
Docker containers to ensure benchmarking are reproducible.

# Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Rutger Vos, Scott Edmunds, Yasset Perez-Riverol, and
Felipe Leprevost for proof reading the article. The authors also wish to thank
all members of the bioinformatics community who have provided feedback through
comments, issues and the bioboxes chatroom, in particular Keith Bradnam for
suggesting the project's name.

# Figure legends

## Figure 1

Contrasting the current software situation in bioinformatics with using biobox
Docker containers with standardised interfaces.

## Figure 2

Example of bioboxes command line interface.

``` bash

pip install --user biobox_cli

biobox run short_read_assembler bioboxes/velvet --input reads.fq.gz --output contigs.fa
biobox run short_read_assembler bioboxes/megahit --input reads.fq.gz --output contigs.fa

```
